[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A historian traveling through
Bolivia and Peru in the 16th
century asked the natives
whether the extraordinary
temples seen there
were built by the Inca.
They laughed at the
question, affirming
that they were made
long before the Inca,
that they had heard
from their predecessors
that the sacred places
appeared suddenly
in the course of a
single night, built
by an ancient race of
tall superhuman people,
long since vanished,
who possessed
a magical technology
with which they carved,
shaped, and moved enormous
stones as though they
were lighter than air.
All this took place after
a crashing meteorite
caused a catastrophic flood that
wiped out most life on Earth.
These temples, it was
said, are their legacy.
By examining the myths and
folklore so carefully preserved
throughout the Andes and
combining them with the latest
evidence, the megalithic
temples of the Andes
are coming alive once again,
revealing their secret
as places of communication
with the gods.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
13,000 feet up in the
Andes sits Titicaca,
the world's highest navigable
lake, once a formidable inland
ocean.
On its southern shore
lie the remains of two
temples, Tiwanaku and Pumapunku.
Tiwanaku is probably the
world's oldest temple.
The megaliths along its
central plaza reference
significant celestial events
along the horizon in 15,000 BC.
Despite its age
and destruction, it
seems that something superhuman
was once at work here.
The stones, quarried as
much as 55 miles away,
were said to have been
moved through the air
to the sound of a trumpet.
It appears the
entire site was built
using sound and anti-gravity.
But to what end?
In the local Aymara
Language, Tiwanaku
means "navel at the center,"
indicating a location
where culture was seeded by
people described as godlike.
But the name is of
Polynesian origin,
and it also means
receiver-transmitter.
Tiwanaku, it seems, is a place
where humans can communicate
with other levels of reality.
Then the most ancient
of Aymara legends
says there came a time
of "Unu Pachakuti,"
the world overturned by water.
It describes how a
disintegrating comet
hit the Earth and generated a
flood whose waves reached even
the tallest mountains.
As the Earth trembled, the
waters of Lake Titicaca
overwhelmed the temple city
of Tiwanaku and Pumapunku.
The legend also describes
how a builder god
named Viracocha appeared at
Tiwanaku with his sister-wife.
And together with
seven shining beings,
they were charged
with raising humans
from a state of savagery.
They began by rebuilding
Tiwanaku and Pumapunku,
crafting some of the
hardest rock on Earth
with laser-like precision that
even today modern technology
is hard pressed to match.
Some of the masonry is
still in pristine condition
despite thousands
of years of neglect.
One of its most
beautiful artifacts
is the Sun Gate, carved from
a single piece of stone.
The ratio of its
length to height
is the same as that between
the solar and lunar calendars.
At the top, an effigy of
the creator god Pacha Kamaq
holds two rods of power, the
twin serpents representing
the masculine and feminine
energies that flow along
the Earth and sustain all life.
The adjacent bird figures
define the equinoxes, eclipses,
and other stellar information
as observed from this location,
making this whole piece
one massive calendar,
the observations of a
scientist, or a magician.
Viracocha and
companions are described
as being very different
to indigenous peoples.
They were white-skinned,
bearded, fair-headed,
and they understood the laws
of nature and how to bend them.
They were also
described as giants,
and there is evidence of a
different race of people that
lived in the Andes long ago.
Analysis of unusual,
long-headed skulls discovered
throughout the region
reveals mitochondrial DNA
with mutations unknown in any
human, primate, or animal known
to science.
And what's more
bizarre, these people
appear to have originated in
Europe or the Middle East.
If so, Viracocha and
his seven shining ones
may have been the same people
as another group of seven
tall beings, the
Egyptian Acu Shemsu
Hor, the followers of
Horus, who likewise
appeared after a
catastrophic world flood
to rebuild civilization.
They, too, are said to have
moved stones through the air
and created the foundations
of temples we see today.
The same story is
repeated in Sumeria,
where this group
of seven gods were
called Apkallu, often depicted
in Sumerian art as falcons.
One of the highest
concentrations
of long-headed skulls ever
discovered in the Andes
is in Paracas, where a
400-foot-tall tree of life
is carved on the side of a
cliff like a geodesic marker.
The design features
an isosceles triangle.
And if this triangle
is superimposed
across the landscape, with
the second point in Tiwanaku,
then the third point
marks the exact position
of another ancient site, Cusco.
After Viracocha and
his seven shining ones
completed their
work at Tiwanaku,
they took their knowledge
300 miles northwest
and established a second navel
of the Earth in this valley.
Cusco means "uncovered
navel stone."
Cusco was already
ancient beyond memory
by the time Spanish
conquistadors arrived
and enslaved the Inca.
When they built
their cathedral, they
did so on top of
Viracocha original temple.
Yet elements of its former
glory are still visible today,
such as the original
wall of basalt blocks
that once encircled
the navel stone.
Its elegant curve and precision
have withstood the earthquakes
that regularly destroy the
newer buildings all around.
Inside, the megalithic
masonry of the original temple
bears testament to the skill
of its ancient architects.
It once featured
seven rooms dedicated
to the sun, moon, the Pleiades,
Venus, rain and thunder,
and Viracocha.
400 sheets of gold
covered its walls,
while in the center stood a
mythical scene of hundreds
of animals and stalks of
corn, all made of gold.
The Spanish melted
everything, and all
that remains today is
this curious stone box,
carved from a single
piece of basalt.
Along the streets and
alleyways of old Cusco,
there are reminders of
its megalithic origins.
Stones are fitted with
extraordinary precision,
without mortar, by people
for whom shaping large rocks
appears to have been as
easy as rolling pastry.
And as if this wasn't
enough of a challenge,
some of the megaliths
incorporate as much as 12
different angles.
The skilled masonry
often appears
beside the inferior
Incan stonework,
revealing how the
knowledge has regressed
over thousands of years.
Many of the stones even have
an unusual reflective glaze
that suggests an
extremely high heat was
applied to create the joints.
But the greater mystery of
Cusco lies in its relationship
with two other local sites
overlooking the city--
Saksaywaman and Qenqo.
And the three from a perfect
triangular relationship,
a remarkable feat of
geodesy in itself,
considering the challenging
altitude and steep terrain.
Reaching Saksaywaman requires
a steep, 700-foot climb.
It is a sprawling site, composed
of several different, yet
interdependent, temples.
The first tip of
the Cusco triangle
is right here,
inside this horseshoe
of seven alcoves,
each representing
the elements of Andean
creation, as well as
a reference to the stars in
the constellation associated
with high wisdom, the Pleiades.
Few pay it much attention,
yet this is quite
possibly the oldest
and most important
section of Saksaywaman.
Judging by its
present condition,
it appears to have suffered
a major catastrophe long ago,
perhaps the same one that
brought Viracocha here.
A few hundred yards
away lies this monolith.
It has been carved
from hard andesite,
with niches, false
doors, alcoves,
and stairs that lead nowhere.
Many of the features are
astronomically significant.
Hundreds of such
house-sized boulders
lie scattered
throughout the region,
each resembling the plan
of a city in miniature.
But why they were made
is still a mystery.
Saksaywaman features
a large oval arena,
its perimeter fitted
with about 100 alcoves.
In addition to its function
as a solar and lunar calendar,
it may also have been a
site where an initiation
ritual was once performed.
A clue lies in this small
preparatory chamber,
beside which a narrow
and awkward entrance
has been cut into the bedrock.
It faces the equinox sunset, an
alignment that is traditionally
associated with a secret
initiation in which candidates
entered a tunnel
and found themselves
navigating a claustrophobic
labyrinth in total darkness.
The idea was to experience
the journey taken by the soul
as it navigates the otherworld
during an out-of-body ritual.
Part of this labyrinth
of tunnels still exists.
At the end, the
successful initiate
would exit to face the equinox
sunrise, to be proclaimed
raised from the dead.
The ritual precedes
Christianity's idea
of resurrection by
thousands of years
and is repeated in the
Mediterranean legend of Theseus
and the Minotaur,
the story of a hero
who ventures into the
darkness of the underworld
to metaphorically slay his
animal self so that he may
return to face the
equinox sunrise as a risen
or spiritualized hero.
The focal point of Saksaywaman
is a natural outcrop
of rock, once artificially
surrounded by walls
of elegantly fitted stone.
This is the Andean depiction
of the mound of creation,
the hill that first rose
out of the waters of chaos
and where the knowledge of
the gods was first deposited.
Parts of its exposed
limestone actually
resemble water
tumbling like waves.
The mound is composed
of nine levels.
Like other sacred mounds
throughout the world,
the number is symbolic of
utmost perfection, a reminder
to the spiritual seeker of
the path that is required
on the road to self-mastery.
At the summit of this navel,
a nameless ancient artist
carved a set of 13 steps
with extraordinary precision.
The steps reference
the lunar calendar.
They also face the
distant horizon,
as though expecting
a significant event.
And this occurs like
clockwork every 18.7 years,
for the stepladder motif
marks the southernmost rising
of the moon before it
begins its journey back
to the Northern Hemisphere.
It is from this
summit that one gets
a first glimpse of the
scale of the undulating
walls of Saksaywaman.
The megalithic construction
looks skilled and effortless.
Boulders appear as
though pulled into place,
each stone fitted onto
the next without mortar,
as though the gods
were playing with Lego.
Geologists have discovered how
the composition of the stone
differs from that at the
quarry, 20 miles away
on the opposite
side of the valley.
Although the stone in the
quarry contains fossils,
these are not just missing
from the stones at Saksaywaman.
But the stone itself
appears to have
been subjected to an intense
heat of 1,500 degrees that
has recrystallized the stone.
Since this is impossible under
normal, natural conditions,
it implies that the ancient
builders of Saksaywaman
and sites like it used some
kind of portable technology
that is incompatible
with such a remote age.
It is also an excessive
amount of work
for what is supposed
to be nothing
more than a protective wall.
There is a second possibility.
In the 16th century,
two Jesuit priests
were walking the Inca Trail when
they came across an old grave.
As they rummaged
through the contents,
they found a clay vase which
was accidentally dropped,
revealing a pungent
brown liquid.
The priests were disappointed
to lose the vase and moved on.
When they returned
the following day,
they noticed that the rock
where the liquid had spilled
had been made molten.
This curious anecdote
may provide a major clue
as to how the megalith builders
molded their stone into place.
They may have discovered a
type of organic molecular acid
that is capable of
dissolving stone.
But why did the builders
arrange the walls of Saksaywaman
in three tiers and in
the shape of a zigzag?
Certainly, the design offers
tremendous structural integrity
in a region known for
violent earthquakes.
Yet a recent study of the
measurements of its 22 angles
revealed them to be
astronomically significant.
They encode the mathematical
values of the cycle of the sun
and moon, the
measurements of time,
the axial tilt of the Earth,
eclipses, and much more.
The wall of Saksaywaman is
essentially a library in stone.
Was Viracocha and his
seven shining gods
responsible for this marvel?
These traveling gods are
described as magicians
and very tall.
To such people, the size of the
cornerstones of Saksaywaman,
which measure 35
feet on average,
would seem perfectly
normal to them.
It is also worth noting
that the original threshold
stones of the gateways
are over 3 feet tall--
totally impractical for
normal humans, but a sensible
stepping stone for
very, very tall people.
The same situation appears in
the Egyptian temple of Edfu,
where the followers
of Horus are described
as being 15 feet tall.
Indeed, there is a strong
Egyptian connection
at Saksaywaman.
The name means "the place
of the satisfied falcon."
While the condor is central
to Andean mythology,
the falcon is never mentioned.
So why name such a temple after
a bird that is symbolically
insignificant in this region?
And why should this
falcon be satisfied?
If an ancient Egyptian
were travelling here,
he would understand the
implications of such a name
because in Egypt it was
synonymous with a temple
complex of Saqqara.
Saqqara is named for Sokar,
the falcon god of rebirth.
Here, countless initiates
came to take part
in a secret ritual
marking the highest
level of initiation, the
ritual of living resurrection.
It required a candidate
to be interred
inside a dark chamber
for several days,
while his or her soul
explored the underworld.
When the initiate
regained consciousness,
he or she was led at dawn
to the top of a mount
to witness the rising of
Venus before the sunrise.
The ritual was conducted on the
winter solstice and the spring
equinox.
This ritual may have taken
place at Saksaywaman.
From the air, the zigzag walls
resemble the feathers and wings
of a large bird.
And as long as
traditional records,
there has been a festival
here every winter solstice,
celebrating the
resurrection of the sun.
Seen from an observation
tower on the summit,
the edges of the walls
mark the exact position
of the rising sun
at the solstices,
while every eight
years Venus rises along
the spine of Saksaywaman.
The event marked the high
point of this important ritual.
A short walk along an
ancient ceremonial route
stands another mound,
deliberately surrounded
by an expertly built enclosure.
The bedrock has been carved into
all manner of intriguing shapes
for a purpose that
remains unknown.
Similar sculptures exist on
the other side of the Pacific
at Mount Moiwa in
Japan, the location
of a similar culture also placed
in a remote age, a time of gods
who appeared following
a global flood.
Adjacent to the site
lies a colossal limestone
butte called Qenqo.
It marks the third point
of the Cusco triangle.
It, too, has been
carved with stairways
that lead to the
sky, niches, curves,
libation bowls, and other
unusual shapes in the stone.
Most impressive of
all, its interior
has been hollowed
out into a chamber.
Qenqo may have been the final
stop for initiates performing
their duties at Saksaywaman,
the last stage of the living
resurrection ritual.
Even before the Inca arrived,
it was already known locally
as the door to the otherworld,
and enough evidence
survives to support the theory.
Outside the chamber, there
is a preparatory area
composed of a curving wall,
shaped into 17 alcoves.
This number is common to
temples around the world
where the same ritual
took place, notably
the great mound of Knowth in
Ireland with its 17 satellite
mounds and the Osirian at
Abydos with its 17 side chambers
where the mysteries of these
resurrected god men, Osiris,
were once conducted.
After preparing,
candidates at Qenqo
were led to the entrance, which
is reached by a passage cut out
of the bedrock facing
the equinox sunset.
The low entrance forces a
person to enter in humility.
Inside, the dark
chamber is elegantly
hollowed out of the limestone
into various alcoves,
with a central,
freestanding structure where
one can lie down and spend a
few solitary nights wrapped
inside a protected room,
again in accordance
with the procedures
of initiation.
At dawn on the third
day, the initiate
would leave via
an S-shaped tunnel
and into a courtyard
to witness Venus rising
before the equinox sun.
The face of the bedrock has
been artificially caught
at an angle of 23 degrees to
allow this to be witnessed.
The purpose of the ritual was to
allow the soul of the initiate
access to specialized
knowledge that can only
be obtained in the otherworld.
It is therefore significant
that a second passage
has been skillfully
cut and angled
in this limestone boulder to
allow the trajectory of Sirius
to be observed on the solstice.
Like Venus, Sirius
was a star venerated
by the Andean people and
other ancient cultures
as the source of wisdom.
This bright star
can be seen rising
above bedrock that has
been artificially cut
beside the courtyard.
It seems these temples
fulfilled purposes
that were both practical
as well as spiritual.
There's a lot more to
Cusco than meets the eye.
The mountain peaks surrounding
the navel of the Earth
mark the passage of the Milky
Way, which the Andeans regarded
as Mayu, the celestial river.
Seen from Cusco, the
mountains establish
an intercardinal horizon.
And as the river of stars
arcs through the night,
it creates a cosmic axis.
This was recreated and marked
on the ground with sacred sites
called huacas, 328
of them, representing
the time it takes the moon
to complete 12 cycles.
It was believed
that by mirroring
the perfection of the sky, a
cosmic order was established
on the ground that permeated
through all aspects
of everyday life.
One of these sacred
sites is Quillarumiyoc.
It is a large site containing a
preparatory temple, waterways,
and a step pyramid, and a
path gradually leading uphill
to a small cave.
But its most curious
feature is a huge boulder
on whose face someone cut a
semicircular bowl with seven
steps with great precision.
The device appears to be
another calendrical masterpiece,
for each step references
the solstices,
equinox, and the major and
minor standstills of the moon.
Its alignments
may help establish
a possible date for the site.
The ark of this stellar dial
marks the three prominent stars
of the Andean people--
Sirius, Capella,
and the Pleiades.
And this conjunction
last occurred at sunset
on the summer
solstice in 3100 BC.
The design is also a
symbolic gesture to Viracocha
and the seven shining
gods who brought
this wisdom to the Andes.
The huacas that
encircle Cusco are not
placed at random on the land.
They are each positioned
along ley lines
that radiate outward from the
navel stone, each one appearing
to reference astronomically
significant objects in the sky.
One of the most intriguing
of these is Amaru Machay.
Amaru means serpent, referring
to the pathways of the Earth's
energy that flow into each
of the chambers carved out
of the living rock.
The stone inside the
chambers is covered
with an unusual ceramic
glaze composed of aluminium,
magnesium, and silica.
How this was done is not
known, but inside the effect
on the senses is palpable.
Another intriguing
sight is found halfway
up a steep ravine, where
someone carved an entrance
into the mountainside.
Then they slashed the
bedrock with great precision
to create a false door.
The same design feature
appears in Persia and Egypt.
This site is called
Naupa Iglesia.
A naupa is an inhabitant
of the spirit world.
It's not by accident
they are referred
to as spirit doors or
windows into paradise
because these alcoves mark
the passage of the Earth's
electromagnetic currents.
The measurements are not random.
They conform to
musical notation.
The length-to-height
ratio is three to one,
making a perfect fifth
in the second octave.
The ratio of the alcove is
five to six, a minor third.
The five-to-six ratio
describes the rotation
of the Earth, whose
pole completes
one full rotation of
its axis every 25,920
years, while the planet tilts
4 degrees every 21,600 years,
a ratio of 5 to 6.
This accurate calculation of
the motions of the planets
is also encoded in another
unusual temple, the Bent
Pyramid of Egypt.
Dominating this
unique environment
is the cave ceiling.
It has been sliced like butter
at two different angles,
creating another mystery.
One angle is 60
degrees, the other 52.
There is only one
other place on Earth
where these two numbers
appear side by side--
the angles of the slopes of
the two major pyramids at Giza.
Yet again, the echo
of ancient Egypt
permeates the
temples of the Andes.
There is another anomaly
in this sacred space.
Its creator picked
the exact spot
on the side of the
mountain where exists
a single outcrop of bluestone.
The three-step design
defines the Andean view
of the universe--
the creative underworld,
the physical middle world,
and the ethereal otherworld.
The central niche is also cut
to musical notation, the ratio,
three to two, a perfect fifth.
Bluestone contains
a type of crystal
that was used in early
radio receivers because
of its excellent
transmitting qualities.
The rock is also
magnetic, a useful feature
for shamanic journeying.
The same stone was
once chosen to build
the oldest part of Stonehenge.
It seems that Naupa
Iglesia was designed
by a cosmic artist
for anyone wishing
to access another
level of reality
and communicate with the gods.
Just as the Egyptians
regard the river Nile
as the terrestrial
counterpart of the Milky Way,
so the Aymara, the Quechua,
and the Puquina people
have the Urubamba.
Around the winter solstice,
the sacred marriage
of Isis and Osiris
was celebrated
in the temples along the
Nile, while in Peru it
was the festival of Capac Raymi,
when pilgrimage was undertaken
and people paid tribute
at the temples that
line the banks of the Urubamba.
It began with gatherings
at sacred springs,
such as Tambomachay, during
which the waters were blessed
and ritual bathing purified
pilgrims on the long journey
ahead.
The pilgrim trail was arduous.
It followed the meandering river
valley and the narrow trail
along steep mountainsides.
People would rest and pray at
the temple complex of Pisac,
built onto a natural spur
overlooking the Urubamba.
The terracing around
Pisac is a wonder
of engineering in itself.
The next stop along the
trail was Ollantaytambo.
Six colossal stone blocks,
made of andesite and polished
pink porphyry make
up the sacred area,
part of a destroyed
megalithic temple
called the House of the Dawn.
The stones appear
as though machined.
There are over 30
300-ton megaliths
here, perhaps the
biggest masonry
to be found in this valley,
in a style resembling
that of Tiwanaku.
Carved on the face of the
stones is a step ladder relief
called a chakana, meaning
to bridge or cross.
It represents the three
levels of existence.
It was the mastery of
this spiritual ideal that
allowed the soul to transmit
the cosmic vault to access
all levels of reality, the
benefit being immortal life.
The same design appears
in ancient Egypt.
Gazing at this temple from the
steep hill across the valley
is the place where
the god descends.
It is the carved face of Pacha
Kamaq, the regenerative creator
god of the Andes.
Pacha means universe,
and Kamaq, to animate.
He was depicted as an old,
androgynous, gray-bearded giant
who carried a staff.
His nickname, Tunupa,
means load bearer,
upon whose shoulders
the vault of the heavens
rotates perpetually.
Above his head, a small
temple stands like a crown.
The pilgrim trail continues
into the heart of the Andes,
culminating in a lush,
mountainous landscape
and a 2,000-foot climb to
the city in the clouds,
Machu Picchu.
Pilgrims would complete
the winter solstice
ritual of Capac Raymi with
festivities in the main plaza.
This area of Machu Picchu is
part of the public section.
There is also the
sacred section called
Yampu, the dwelling
place of the gods.
And it stands on its
own natural mound.
This area was
accessed only by those
who had received special
training in the mystery
secrets.
The sacred section is the
mirror image of the gods
and of the heavens.
It was considered perfect.
And so its priests were
sensitive to anyone
who would bring impurity
of thought or action
into the sacred space.
If the dwelling place of
the gods was compromised,
the city would fall, and with
it the cohesion of the tribe.
This exact location is
linked to two other locations
across Peru also
associated with Viracocha
and his group of traveling
gods, Paracas and Matarani,
from where they were last seen
disappearing into the Pacific
Ocean.
The three sites form
a perfect triangle.
It's in this sacred section
that we find the oldest
megalithic masonry.
In fact, there are three
stages of construction here.
The prehistoric uses stone
of extraordinary scale.
The later stage features
beautifully cut and fitted
masonry, just as in
Cusco and Tiwanaku.
The stones are so tightly fitted
that even an alpaca hair could
not be inserted between them.
The newer masonry
is that of the Inca
period, where stones are smaller
and the fitting less precise.
At the summit of Machu
Picchu sits the Intihuatana,
the hitching post of the
sun, where astronomer priests
announced the exact moment
when the sun reached
its maximum position in the sky.
And they figuratively
tied it to the stone
so as to cause it to move
in the opposite direction.
The Intihuatana's
14-degree declination
means that at midday
on the equinox
the sun casts no shadow.
It is said to sit with all
of its might upon the pillar.
Each angle aligns
the stellar events
such as the position
of the moon, Pleiades,
and Southern Cross.
The sacred precinct
was the place
to where a small
group of initiates
were led aside from
the rest of the crowd
during the winter
solstice celebration.
Here, they prepared themselves
for the final initiation
ritual.
This included
further understanding
of the mystery
secrets, part of which
was taught in a
restricted chamber
beneath this
observational tower.
This unusual room has been
carved out of the bedrock.
A shallow wall has been
cut into angled steps
to allow the rising
equinox sun to shine
onto specific parts of the
chamber at prescribed periods.
Inside, two shallow doorways
have been carefully fitted.
One represents truth
and the other falsehood.
It is an important teaching
on the path to initiation
called the two ways.
It was still taught in the
5th century BC in the mystery
schools of Greece.
And yet the final phase
of this unique ritual
was not performed
at Machu Picchu,
but on the mountain
that so dominates
the sacred city, the
beehive-shaped hill of Huayna
Picchu.
Huayna Picchu is 400 feet closer
to the sky and very steep.
The unusual shape
acts like a coil,
attracting the electromagnetic
currents generated
by the Urubamba
River as it flows
in an arc around the
base of the hill.
The beehive shape
is itself symbolic.
It is the shape
associated with temples
where the living resurrection
initiation took place
around the world.
The path to the top is
steep and challenging,
mirroring the spiritual
training common in such temples.
But before initiates set their
sights on reaching the summit,
they first had to descend 1,200
feet to a secluded temple.
The restricted temple is set
among absolute stillness.
It is yet another superb example
of a sacred site expertly cut
into the bedrock, with
a series of niches
set under a colossal boulder
that seems to defy gravity.
It faces the equinox sunset.
In 3100 BC, initiates
retiring to this man-made womb
would have observed
Orion, the constellation
marking the gateway
to the otherworld,
descending behind the
mountains followed by Sirius,
the star of knowledge.
Here, initiates would
spend several nights
in an induced near-death
state while the soul wandered
and experienced the otherworld.
Like other temples used
for the same ritual,
it is presided by
a lunar goddess.
At the end of this
initiation, they
would make the final
arduous ascent to the summit
before sunrise and greet the
morning star, Venus, whereupon
they were declared newborn
or risen from the dead.
They also got a fantastic
view of Machu Picchu.
Machu Picchu and Huayna Picchu
form a ritual landscape,
and this is revealed
in their names.
The first means
old bird, referring
to Machu Picchu as a place
where the old self comes to die,
metaphorically speaking, while
Huayna Picchu means young bird,
a place where the
new self is born.
Like other initiation
traditions going back
at least 5,000 years, the
Andean spiritual system
taught that the soul of a
living person that experiences
a resurrection does
so by undertaking
a journey to the otherworld.
Accounts of this
journey describe
a bridge across a
raging river and how
the soul crosses the river
assisted by black dogs
capable of seeing
in the dark, just
like the Egyptian story
of Anubis and Apuat
and the Greek legend
of the hounds of Hades.
And in the Andes, we
find these two dogs
in the most
unlikeliest of places--
Lake Titicaca.
When the level of the lake was
much higher than it is today,
the mesa of Cutimbo
was an island.
Here we find the most unusual
stone towers, called chullpas.
Although conventional
archeology believes
they were burial places,
the Aymara disagree.
They call them "uta
amaya," houses of the soul,
not for the soul,
indicating they
were used as places
of facilitation
rather than burial.
The entrance to each chullpa
faces the ritual direction
of the equinoxes sunrise,
and their interiors
are shaped like beehives.
When the sun casts its lights
upon the pillow-shaped stones
at midday, reliefs of
a bride and a groom
reveal themselves
above the entrance,
indicating that
inside this chamber
the initiate engaged
with a sacred marriage
with a divine bride.
This symbol is known the world
over in temples used strictly
for this secret ritual.
But more tellingly,
the reliefs of two dogs
that guide the soul
in the underworld
appear either side
of the tiny entrance.
Not far from Cutimbo
is the mesa Sillustani,
still surrounded by
the water of what
used to be Lake Titicaca
around 7,000 BC.
The towers taper
from the top down,
complete with beehive
interiors and doors facing
the equinox sunrise.
These were probably
built by the Puquina
long before the ancient Aymara.
Sillustani is a naturally
magnetic environment.
Surrounded by water,
its basalt and sandstone
attracts and stores an
electromagnetic charge,
making the entire mesa
an ideal environment
for shamanic journeying rather
than a place to bury the dead.
This ongoing theme
of communication
between the worlds
seems to have been
central to the philosophy of
Viracocha and his shining gods,
seeing as the temples
between Tiwanaku and Cusco
follow this idea,
and none more so
than an unusual hill on the
western shore of Lake Titicaca
called Hayu Marca.
High in iron oxide, Hayu Marca
feels like a place set aside
from the normal world.
Not surprisingly, the name
means "city of the gods."
Along its eastern face,
an ancient architect
carved an immense
portal and a spirit door
facing the equinox sunrise.
The Quechua name of the
portal is 'Amaru Meru,"
the place of the serpent.
So this place marks
the Earth's naturally
flowing pathways of energy.
The native people speak
of this as a gateway
to the lands of the gods.
And in times long
past, great heroes
passed through this gate
for a glorious new life
of immortality in the
world of the gods.
The legend concludes
with a prophecy
that this doorway will
one day open many times
bigger than it actually
is, allowing the gods
to return in their sun ships.
Certainly, local people
respect this temple,
for they often see
strange people dressed
in unusual clothing
emerging from it
and walking towards
Lake Titicaca.
And so we return
to where we began,
to this inland ocean,
the birthplace of gods,
of legends of the superhuman
Viracocha and the temples
he built to last into
our time, reminding us
that if we should
follow the example
he set so many
thousands of years
ago, that by tuning in to
the sacred places of the gods
and following in
their footsteps,
we may yet become like them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]